ՀԱՅԱՍՏԱՆԻ ԳԻՏՈՒ ԹՅՈՒ ՆՆԵՐԻ ԱԶԳԱ ՅԻՆ ԱԿԱԴԵՄԻԱ
Н А Ц И О Н А Л Ь Н А Я А К А Д Е М И Я Н А У К А Р М Е Н И И
N A T I O N A L A C A D E M Y O F S C I E N C E S O F A R M E N I A
         Д О К Л А Д Ы       ԶԵԿՈԻՅՑՆԵՐ          REPORTS
Հատոր
 Том     124                             2024                             № 3–4
Volume


                                                             RADIOPHYSICS

UDK 616.8։537.86
DOI: 10.54503/0321-1339-2024.124.3-4-7

                             T.N. Hovhannisyan

           Nonlinear Properties of Biological Nerve Fiber
                  System in THz Spectrum Range
           (Submitted by Academician R. M. Martirosyan 08/X 2024)

     Keywords: THz, nerve fiber, neural network, nonlinear properties,
nonlinear transformation.

      Introduction. In the central nervous system of living organisms, information
is transmitted through nerve fibers by electrical impulses [2]. According to
various studies [1, 5–7], based on the geometric dimensions and electrical
properties of nerve fibers, it is hypothesized that information exchange through
nerve fibers may occur via electromagnetic waves in the terahertz or infrared
range. Despite these hypotheses and corresponding theoretical models, no
experimental studies are known to us that confirm or refute the exchange of
information through nerve fibers via waves in these ranges. Recently, in our
works [3, 4], the behavior of the animal's nerve fiber system in the terahertz wave
range was studied under the influence of an external constant electric field. The
transmission/absorption of THz radiation through a sample of the animal’s spinal
cord was experimentally investigated. The refractive index of the sample was
measured. Resonant absorption frequencies were observed. The nature of the
transmitted THz pulse changes depending on the applied voltage, and nonlinear
phenomena are observed; further studies are required to understand the nonlinear
behavior of the nerve fiber system in the THz range.
      In this work, the nonlinear properties of the animal's nerve fiber system in
the THz wave range were studied, and mathematical modeling was performed.
The results of the modeling were compared with the experimentally obtained
data.
      Methods and results. A sample of the white matter from a sheep’s spinal
cord was taken as the nerve fiber system, and placed inside a
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) cuvette with a thickness of 100 μm and

                                         7
dimensions of 20 mm x 20 mm, as schematically shown in Fig. 1, similar with
experimental setup implemented in [3] and [4]. The nerve fibers were aligned
parallel to each other and to the walls of the cuvette. Two electrodes were
positioned along the edges of the sample, parallel to the nerve fibers, ensuring
proper electrical contact with the sample.
     The experimental investigations were performed using a Menlo Systems
LAC 1.550 time-domain terahertz (THz) spectrometer. The cuvette containing the
sample was positioned in the path of the THz beam, and the THz pulses
transmitted through the sample were recorded by the spectrometer’s THz
detector. The acquired data were processed using custom-developed software,
resulting in the spectrum of the THz pulses transmitted through the sample and
determining its parameters in the THz frequency range.




    Fig. 1. Sketch of the spinal cord sample, with electrodes positioned inside a PTFE cuvette

     Measurements were conducted under two conditions: with no voltage
applied to the electrodes, and with a voltage of 100 V. The results of
measurements show that parameters of different samples (absorption spectrum,
refractive index), before voltage is applied to electrodes, show similar behaviour.
It was also shown that, in the presence of the constant external voltage, the
parameters of the samples change over time, and these changes are of a similar
nature across different samples. The characteristic patterns of the time domain
and power spectrum of the THz wave passing through the sample are presented in
Fig. 2.
     It can be clearly seen from Fig. 2 that in the presence of voltage, a nonlinear
transformation of the transmitted signal occurred. Computer modeling was
performed to provide a qualitative assessment of the nonlinearities.
     The modeling was performed according to polynomial (1), through which
the input signal is subjected to nonlinear transformation,
                                                8
                 ( )=           ( )+           ( )+            ( )+            ( ) (1),
where,      is the electric field of the THz pulse passed through the sample in the
absence of external voltage,          is the transformed signal, and the values are
the coefficients of the corresponding polynomial terms. The spectrum of the
obtained as a result of the modeling was compared to the spectrum of the THz
pulse transmitted through the sample under the influence of external constant
voltage, recorded experimentally at different moments of time. The values of the
   parameters were determined, for which the spectra obtained from the modeling
were most similar to the experimentally obtained spectra of the THz pulses (Fig. 3).




  Fig. 2. Time domain (1) and power spectrum (3) waveforms of THz pulses passed through the
 sample before the application of voltage. Time domain (2) and power spectrum (4) waveforms of
          THz pulses passed through the sample 2 minutes after the application of voltage.

     Discussion and conclusion. In Figure 3, curves 1 correspond to the
spectrum of the THz wave passed through the sample before the external voltage
was applied, it is provided as a reference waveform. Curves 2 and 3 represent the
spectra of the THz wave in 0,5 and 2 minutes, respectively, after the voltage is
applied to the sample. Curves 4 and 5 represent the results of the nonlinear
transformation of THz pulse (curve 1), with the values shown on the respective
graphs. It can be noticed that along with the duration of voltage application, the
coefficients of nonlinear terms ( , , ) increase, while the coefficient of the
linear term ( ) decreases.
     These results suggest that when external voltage is applied via electrodes, the
nerve fiber system becomes a nonlinear system in the THz range with the
nonlinearity increase depending on the duration of the applied voltage. Based on
the structural characteristics of the Ranvier nodes, it can be assumed that upon
voltage application, the ion channels in these nodes are excited and apparently
become local nonlinear inhomogeneities in the nerve fiber system, which leads to
the overall nonlinear behavior of the sample. The modeling results indicate that
the spectrum of the nonlinearly transformated signal qualitatively resembles the
spectrum of experimentally measured THz pulses.
     The results of this research can help to understand the working principle of
information propagation and exchange in neural systems in living organisms, as
                                              9
well as, complex processes taking place in central nervous system of living
organisms.




 Fig. 3. Curve 1 – spectrum of the THz wave passed through the sample before the external voltage
     application. Curves 2 and 3 represent the spectra of the THz wave after 0,5 and 2 minutes,
   respectively, of applying the voltage to the sample. Curves 4 and 5 represent the results of the
 nonlinear transformation of THz pulse (curve 1), corresponding a values shown on the respective
                                             graphs.

    Funding
    This work was supported by the Science Committee of RA (Research project
№ 23AA-1C027).

     Yerevan State University, Institute of Physics
     е-mail: tigran.hovhannisyan@ysu.am


                                    T.N. Hovhannisyan
                Nonlinear Properties of Biological Nerve Fiber
                      System in THz Spectrum Range

     In this work, the nonlinear properties of the animal's nerve fiber system in the
THz wave range were studied and mathematical modeling was performed. The
results of the modeling were compared with the experimentally obtained data.


                                                10
     The modeling results indicate that the spectrum of the nonlinearly
transformated signal qualitatively resembles the spectrum of experimentally
measured THz pulses.
                             Տ.Ն. Հովհաննիսյան
     Կենսաբանական նյարդաթելային համակարգի ոչ գծային
     հատկությունները տերահերցային սպեկտրալ տիրույթում

    Այս աշխատանքում ուսումնասիրվել են կենդանու նյարդաթելային
համակարգի ոչ գծային հատկությունները ՏՀց ալիքների տիրույթում,
կատարվել է մաթեմատիկական մոդելավորում: Մոդելավորման ար-
դյունքները համեմատվել են փորձնականորեն ստացված արդյունքների
հետ։
    Մոդելավորման արդյունքները ցույց են տալիս, որ ոչ գծային ձևա-
փոխություններից հետո ստացված ազդանշանի սպեկտրը որակապես
համապատասխանում է փորձնականորեն գրանցված ՏՀց իմպուլսների
սպեկտրի հետ։

                                 Т.Н. Оганесян
Нелинейные свойства биологической системы нервных волокон
             в терагерцовом диапазоне спектра
    В данной работе были изучены нелинейные свойства системы нервных
волокон животного в диапазоне терагерцовых волн, а также проведено ма-
тематическое моделирование. Результаты моделирования были сопоставле-
ны с экспериментально полученными данными.
    Результаты моделирования показывают, что спектр нелинейно преоб-
разованного сигнала качественно подобен спектру экспериментально изме-
ренных терагерцовых импульсов.

                                   References
    1. Fraser A., Frey A. Biophysical Journal 8, 1968, 731–734.
    2. Hodgkin A.L., Huxley A.F. Nature 144, 1939, 710–711.
    3. Hovhannisyan T., Makaryan A., Armenian Journal of Physics, 17(1), 2024, 17–
       20.
    4. Hovhannisyan T., Makaryan A., Martirosyan R. Reports NAS RA, 124(2), 2024,
       16–23.
    5. Traill R.R. Toward a theoretical explanation of electro-chemical interaction in
       memory use: The postulated role of infra-red components and molecular
       evolution (Brunel University, Institute of Cybernetics, UK, 1977).
    6. Traill R.R. Speculations in Science and Technology 11(3) (1988) 173–181.
    7. Xiang Z. et al. Nano Research 14, 2020, 590–600.


                                         11
